docs/develop: add cron job docs (#134)
encoredev/encore: docs/develop/cron-jobs.md

---
title: Cron Jobs
---

You can use a `CronJob` to run jobs on a time-based schedule. These automated jobs run similarly to [Cron](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) tasks.

Cron jobs are useful for creating periodic and recurring tasks, like running a database query or sending emails. Cron jobs can also schedule individual tasks for a specific time, such as if you want to schedule a job for a low activity period.

<Callout type="important">

> **Cron jobs** have limitations and idiosyncrasies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind when using cron jobs in your application that:
```

> - In certain circumstances, a single cron job can create multiple jobs. Therefore, jobs should be **idempotent**.

Reviewer: It's not clear what it means for a single job to create multiple jobs. How about:
```suggestion
- In certain circumstances, a single execution can result in your cron job endpoint being called more than once in order to provide at-least-once semantics. As a result jobs should be **idempotent**, meaning calling the cron job endpoint multiple times should behave the same way as calling it once.
```

- The actual job needs to be expressed as a **public** API endpoint, that doesn't have any request data.
- You can uniquely identify a Cron job resource using its ID; this makes it easier to rename or move infrastructure around without recreating or destroying it.

</Callout>

## Defining a Cron job

> With Encore you define cron jobs directly in your code, using our infrastructure declaration syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like other Encore concepts, defining a cron job is done straight in your application code. There's no infrastructure to manage — the Encore Platform automatically manages, schedules, executes and monitors the cron jobs for you. And it works exactly the same way across all the cloud providers we support.
```

```go
package hello // service name

import (
	"context"
	"encore.dev/cron"
)

/*
  In this example, we are defining a cron job.
  The comment above the cron job definition will 
  be used as a description.

  You can also add code snippets in your description,
  which will be picked up by our parser and displayed
  in our web UI.

    var cfg := cron.JobConfig{
      Name:     "Cron Job Example",
      Every:    5 * time.Minute,
      Endpoint: Cron
    }

> */

Reviewer: The comment is a bit meta; it talks about itself and the code snippet example is an example of itself. Let's turn this whole example into a real-world example. https://jvns.ca/blog/2021/07/08/writing-great-examples/ has some great ideas on this topic :)

	Name:     "Cron Job Example",
	Every:    5 * time.Minute,
	Endpoint: Cron,
})

//encore:api public path=/cron
func Cron(ctx context.Context) (*Response, error) {
	msg := "Hello, Cron!"
	return &Response{Message: msg}, nil
}

type Response struct {
	Message string
}
```

<Callout type="important">

We only support creating cron jobs at the package level, any other call location will result in a compilation error.

</Callout>

## Cron job configuration

- `cron.NewJob(ID, ...)` - This ID allows you to rename the variable _or_ move the infrastructure resource without having it being destroyed/recreated. It would cause a compilation error to have two resources of the same type with the same ID within the app.
- `Name` - The Cron job user-friendly name, will auto complete based on the **ID** if not set.
- `Every` - `time.Duration` that determines how often the Cron job is executed; <sup>\*</sup>*if you want more control over the execution schedule we support traditional [cron expressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron#CRON_expression) by setting the `Schedule` field in the `JobConfig` struct; we support either **Every** or **Schedule** but not both*.
```go

> // Define the cron job execution schedule using the Every field

Reviewer: Same thing with these examples; let's make them more realistic with real-world examples.

<Callout type="important">

**Cron jobs** have limitations and idiosyncrasies. For example, in certain circumstances, a single cron job can create multiple jobs. Therefore, jobs should be **idempotent**.

</Callout>

## Defining a Cron job

With Encore you define cron jobs directly in your code, using our infrastructure declaration syntax. We believe it’s forward-compatible and has the easiest path to discoverability.

```go
package hello // service name

import (
	"context"
	"encore.dev/cron"
)

/*
  In this example, we are defining a cron job.
  The comment above the cron job definition will 
  be used as a description.

  You can also add code snippets in your description,
  which will be picked up by our parser and displayed
  in our web UI.

    var cfg := cron.JobConfig{
      Name:     "Cron Job Example",
      Every:    5 * time.Minute,
      Endpoint: Cron
    }
*/
var _ = cron.NewJob("cronjobexample", cron.JobConfig{
	Name:     "Cron Job Example",
	Every:    5 * time.Minute,
	Endpoint: Cron,
})

> //encore:api public path=/cron

Author: This needs to be called by Google Cloud Scheduler, so it needs to be public.

> //encore:api public path=/cron

Reviewer: I believe we can make this work with private endpoints as we're not calling it directly from Google Cloud Scheduler but from our platform

func Cron(ctx context.Context) (*Response, error) {
	msg := "Hello, Cron!"
	return &Response{Message: msg}, nil
}

type Response struct {
	Message string
}
```

<Callout type="important">

> We only support using infrastructure creation at the package level, any other call location will result in a compilation error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We only support creating cron jobs at the package level, any other call location will result in a compilation error.
```

I think we maybe need a separate page to talk about our infrastructure creation syntax. This page is specifically about cronjobs and people might get confused

</Callout>

## Cron job configuration

- `cron.NewJob(ID, ...)` - This ID allows you to rename the variable _or_ move the infrastructure resource without having it being destroyed/recreated. It would cause a compilation error to have two resources of the same type with the same ID within the app.
- `Name` - The Cron job user friendly name, will auto complete based on the **ID** if not set.

> - `Every` - `time.Duration` that determines how often the Cron job is executed; <sup>\*</sup>*if you want more control over the execution schedule we support traditional [cron expressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron#CRON_expression) by setting the `Schedule` field in the `JobConfig` struct; we support either **Every** or **Schedule** but not both*.

Reviewer 2: Should we do an example of this format too?

Author: Yes

- `Endpoint` - The Encore API endpoint containing the actual code you want to run periodically.

<Callout type="important">

We only support endpoints that dont't have any request data. As previously stated, these should be idempotent. 

</Callout>

That means there are only two ways of defining an API endpoint for a Cron job:

- `func Foo(ctx context.Context) (*Response, error)` – when you only return a response
- `func Foo(ctx context.Context) error` – when you need neither request nor response data

## Monitoring Cron jobs

After deploying your app, all Cron jobs defined in code will be shown in your Encore dashboard.

You'll be able to filter them by environment, as well as see if they're active or not, what's the status of their last execution and when are they scheduled to run next.

> ![Cron Jobs UI](/assets/docs/cron.png)

Reviewer 2: Is this already committed? I don't see it in this PR

Author: This work is on the cron-jobs branch in the webapp2 repo

Author: The image as well. All the assets are in the `www` repo.
